I'd like to welcome you to session 416.
Today we're going to be talking about
performance in your Carbon application.
I suppose everybody has been seeing
what we've been doing with the G5.
You probably went down to the lab.
So the performance, it's a great machine.
Applications are going to
get a boost in performance.
You're probably all
very happy about that.
It's very cool.
Now you probably had a chance to install
Panther and run your application as well.
You probably noticed that
actually a lot of operations are
very fast in Panther because our
engineers spend a lot of cycles,
a lot of resources,
and time to make sure that
operations are very fast in Panther.
We talked a little bit with Scott on
Monday in the Mac OS X session,
the State of Union,
about things such as text
drawing being twice as fast.
All of this is great.
But when our customers are
going to buy the next G5,
the dual 2 gigahertz,
if they launch your application and
they get the spinning cursor of death,
that's not good.
That doesn't do us any good to have
the best machine on the planet,
to have the best operating system,
if when somebody gets a
third party application,
the performance level is not there.
And this is really the
goal of this session,
where we're going to
be talking about that.
We're going to be talking about
how you guys can take your
application to the next level.
We're going to talk about tools,
because now we have actually very good
tools to enable you to find out what
are the performance issues in your app.
We're going to talk about technologies
that can help you improve the
performance in your application.
We're going to talk about two
different kinds of performance today.
We're going to talk about
the real performance,
which is how long does it take to
process an image that is 500 megabytes?
How long does it take to run a filter?
How long does it take to access the web,
to download a URL, to access a database?
But we'll talk as well of what
we call perceived performance,
which is what happens
when a person executes.
Do you give feedback to your user,
or does the application
look kind of hanged?
And if there is one thing I want you
guys to realize and to understand
with this session is that now I think
Apple has shown you that we spend
a lot of cycle and resources and
we have an OS that is very fast.
Mac OS X is way above mature,
and you're going to
see with the hardware,
we've done an excellent job in looking at
what we were doing wrong in performance.
Now I think it's up to you
guys to go back to your rooms,
to go back to your offices
and start using Shark,
start using Sampler,
moving to Mac OS and use the
latest technologies that we have.
In the toolbox.
In networking.
In file IO.
To really get the best of Mac OS X.
And for that, I'd like to invite Curt.
Curt is going to be talking
about all these topics,
and I'll see you for a Q&A.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Xavier.
So, like Xavier mentioned,
performance is critical
to your application.
If your app doesn't perform well,
users are going to make judgments
about the quality and the polish of
your app and a Mac OS X as a system.
So while we've been optimizing
parts of the toolbox and of Carbon,
we've identified some techniques
to identify where there's
performance problem areas,
and we'd like to share those with you.
We've also identified some techniques
for improving those areas once you've
identified what those problems are.
And we'll share those with you as well.
And also talk about new
technologies in Panther.
And also to reacquaint you with some
technologies which will give you
the best performance on Mac OS X.
So there's four problem areas
I'm going to talk about today,
and that's application launch.
If it takes a long time for your app
to come up and start processing events,
the user's going to feel as
if the system is sluggish.
We'll talk about low-level services,
and that could be with
your use of memory APIs,
how you're allocating memory,
also with file network I/O and threading.
Drawing.
Now this is huge.
This is a huge aspect
of your application.
If the user clicks on a background
window and it takes a long time for that
window to come up and draw its contents,
the user is definitely going to
get the impression that your app
is sluggish or maybe the system
is not performing very well.
And finally,
we'll talk about poor responsiveness.
So let's get right into talking
about application launch performance.
So in identifying what you can do to
improve the performance of your app,
it's good to figure out
what's going on during launch.
Well, there's a lot of file I/O.
The second the user clicks on your
icon or double clicks on your icon,
the system starts loading in
the executable for your app,
the associated resources.
You're probably loading in preferences,
maybe registering and
initializing plug-ins.
And on top of all the file I/O,
the system or your app is doing
its standard initialization.
It's going through and allocating
large chunks of memory,
maybe doing some table initializations,
et cetera.
So how do you find
some of these problems?
Well, during launch,
to identify problems with
how you're utilizing the CPU,
launch it with Sampler.
And Sampler's a utility that's
found in developer applications.
And by launching it from the UI,
what Sampler does really is it
takes a periodic snapshot of where
your app is in the execution.
So when you're done sampling it,
it compiles this all together and
you get a list of where most of
the time is spent in your app.
And so you can identify areas that
you can focus on and optimize.
Now in terms of the file I/O,
what's going on, you can use the command
line utility FS usage.
And this will allow you to identify
what areas are being--or what file
I/O is happening on behalf of you by the
system loading in resources and whatnot.
And you can identify--maybe you're
loading in files that you didn't expect
to like document templates or images that
could definitely be referred to later.
your time.
So some solutions for this.
All those areas that we talked about,
all the file I/O and all the
initialization that's going on,
you have some control over.
Now internally,
we compile our frameworks with
the optimization for size,
and we recommend that you do that too.
So this will make the binary smaller,
the system has to load less in.
And you can do this in Xcode,
there's a preference
for optimization level,
and you can use optimize for size,
and you can also do that
using other compilers as well.
What's really important is to
always provide feedback to the user.
If it's going to take a really
long time for your app to launch,
it's a good idea to
put up a splash screen.
Let them know immediately that your app
has been loaded and things are going on.
Even better than putting up a splash
screen is to provide some type of
progress within that splash screen.
Let them know that some
components are being initialized,
new plugins are being registered.
And the best solution of all
is to put up your main document
window as fast as possible.
This gives the user the impression,
this perception,
that everything's up and running.
Even if the foundation and other
parts of your app aren't really
initialized and ready to go,
if you can get that document
window up as fast as possible,
it gives them the impression
that you're ready to go.
You should also avoid I/O during launch.
There's a lot, like I said,
that the system's doing on your behalf.
If you can avoid reading in document
templates or some preferences that
could be deferred to a later time,
that's excellent.
And you should always avoid
writing during launch.
Launch is considered a read-only process.
You're reading in parts
of your application,
getting ready to go.
You shouldn't write.
And then also take advantage of
lazy initialization techniques,
and I'll talk about what
that means in a second.
But it's a technique that allows you
to defer allocation and initialization
of components to a later time.
And closely coupled with this is
to avoid static class construction.
If you're C++ based and you have a static
class defined in one of your modules,
and what I mean by that is
a global that says static,
foo, and then the instance.
Keep in mind that that instance's
constructor is going to be invoked
before main is ever called.
So before you can even
start processing events,
there may be a lot of code
that's being executed.
So I mentioned lazy initialization.
What does that really mean?
Well,
rather than initializing a component in
anticipation that it's going to be used,
just defer that until a later time,
until that component is
actually going to be executed.
And it's really as simple as defining
a static Boolean that's initialized
to false to indicate that your
component hasn't been initialized yet.
And later on during the
execution of your app,
before that component is used,
check that flag.
If it hasn't been initialized,
go ahead and initialize it
and then toggle the flag.
Now the reason lazy initialization is a
good technique on Mac OS X and was maybe
not a good technique on classic Mac OS,
and what I mean by that
is Mac OS 9 and earlier,
is because Mac OS 9 had really tight
memory constraints and you had to deal
with the problem of memory fragmentation.
So it was a good practice on Mac OS 9
and earlier to allocate as much as
you needed up front that you knew
that you were going to be needing.
So if that were to fail,
you could bail out as soon as
possible rather than letting
the user make a document that,
it may be a destructive operation
later on when you needed this memory.
But on Mac OS X there's
a lot more memory,
there's a huge virtual address space,
you don't need to worry about that.
You should always code defensively still,
but be aware that lazy
initialization is a good technique
to improve performance of launch.
Now, next, we'd like to talk about the
low-level services such as threading,
memory, and network and file I/O.
And to do that,
I'd like to bring up the manager
of the core services team,
John Iaroci.
Thanks, Curt.
So, threading, memory, and file I/O.
What do these guys have in common?
One of the things they have in
common is that they're often not
very apparent when you're looking
at your application in terms of
contributing to a performance problem.
But the benefit in looking at problems,
performance problems in
these areas is immense.
You can get a lot of time back by
looking into these three general areas.
I'm going to go through these areas,
both suggesting what APIs to use for
these technologies and also some tips in
the areas in terms of figuring out what
performance problems you have in them.
So starting with threading.
First of all, if any of you haven't
heard the message so far,
the Cooperative Thread Manager,
the Carbon Thread Manager,
is really not a...
It was supported for
compatibility with OS 9,
supported for the Carbon transition.
It's not a great solution
for threading on Mac OS X.
[Transcript missing]
MPThreads and Pthreads are
both fully supported OS X APIs.
There are some slight differences,
but they're very similar.
It's mostly your choice
on which APIs to use.
It's mostly going to be dictated
by the code base that you have.
The thing to remember with
threading in general is don't,
just because it's a
preemptive operating system,
don't assume threads are free.
They're backed by kernel resources,
so use them well.
Make sure that you're making,
that you're just making
good use of these threads.
A lot of times,
because they're available,
because they're kind of
a nice construct to use,
it's convenient sometimes,
threads will be overused.
And that will contribute to
your performance problems.
Sometimes in a way which
is kind of hard to find.
And I'm going to go into
that in the next slide.
One good guideline that I'd offer you
is think about the work that you're
actually going to do on that thread.
Because remember,
you have to create the thread.
At some point.
And you have to message over in some
way to the thread to get it to do work.
And oftentimes,
even if you create the thread
and pass it some parameters,
you have to still wait for the
thread to complete and then
message back to your main thread.
So there are costs involved
just in using threads.
Not to mention,
you typically have to lock
when you're using threads.
And there's a cost there too.
Okay, in the tip area for threading,
first of all,
if you're not already familiar with it,
in GDB there's some support for
debugging threaded applications.
The thread apply all directive
lets you do various GDB commands.
The obvious one that most people
know is thread apply all stack
crawl or backtrace so you can see
where all the different threads are.
In Panther there were some
changes so that the ID that's
reported in GDB actually maps
to your underlying Mach threads.
So you can actually,
if you can't tell from the
stack crawl or if you don't have
symbols for whatever reason,
you can track it that way.
The other tool to be
familiar with is Top.
It'll tell you at least how
many threads you're using.
This is good because you can actually
see if you have threads coming and going,
how many threads you're getting
at kind of a high watermark,
how many threads you typically have.
And then look at those threads and see,
do you expect them to stay beyond
the duration of a certain operation?
Sometimes people just leave
the threads sitting there.
They're not doing anything.
There's kind of a trade off but you have
to decide in your app if it makes more
sense to get rid of that thread or not.
There are kernel resources associated
with it so if you're done with it,
you might want to just clean that up.
And then lastly,
I'd really encourage you to
look at the Thread Viewer app.
It's the best tool on the
system for actually visualizing
what's going on with the thread.
It lets you look on a per thread
basis how you're using memory,
what kind of locking usage you have,
and thread priority.
Okay, after threading,
I would really encourage you to take a
look at how you're using memory APIs,
particularly the Carbon Memory Manager.
First thing I'd like to say is
that when we looked at all of these
APIs at the Carbon transition,
we actually looked at
some of these and said,
"Do we really,
really need them because there's some
issues there?" HLock and 9Hunlock,
unfortunately, fell in the category of
they had to be there.
They had to be there so your
app would continue to work on 9.
So in order to enable a binary
that worked on both 9 and 10,
we had to support HLock and HUnlock.
There's really no good
reason to have them on 10.
And there's a certain performance
problem with frequent
use of HLock and HUnlock,
especially when they're doing
nothing of use for your app.
So take a look at how you're
using HLock and HUnlock.
A lot of our apps internally we've
looked and seen we don't bother,
we continue to use it and we
don't really need to use it.
The only time that a handle is going to
be changed kind of out from under you,
if you will, is when somebody explicitly
calls set handle size.
So look and see if you're doing
that yourself or look and see if
you're relying on the side effect
of calling HLock and HUnlock.
And then in general,
memory and free are the APIs that you
should be using for your everyday usage.
The memory manager is another
layer on top of these,
so it's not going to help having
that layer when you're really talking
about performance sensitive code.
And memory and free are what you
want to be using when you use our
debugging and development tools.
If you have seen Sampler
on the Panther seed,
you've noticed that there's
new support in Sampler.
It's really been revamped,
so it let you visualize some
of your memory usage patterns.
In particular,
tracing capabilities are there,
which is fantastic.
We've done a lot of performance
enhancements in Panther based
on this technology,
being able to look and see how
often we're allocating and what
kind of allocation patterns we have.
You can also use Sampler directly
to look for your use of HLock and
HUnlock and set and get state.
And then of course, malloc-debug and the
leaks command line tool.
That's both for the performance
of your app and the performance
of the system in general.
And I get in the habit myself of
just using top over in a side window,
top-nash-w, so it shows you deltas,
so you can see if you have a leak
or if you're growing larger than
you would expect to be growing
during a particular operation.
Okay,
so threading and memory is one area where
you can really improve your performance
by looking at it with those tools.
Files is another.
Files is one where I really recommend
that you get involved with the tools,
particularly FS usage.
But let me start with the APIs.
First of all,
[Transcript missing]
This particularly pays off over network
volumes and over non-HFS-like volumes,
POSIX volumes.
You'll see the benefit of using
these APIs on those kind of volumes.
And I really encourage you to test
your applications on these volumes.
You'll see different characteristics.
It'll tend to exaggerate your file IOs,
and you'll see that it does
impact your performance.
In general,
the stance we've taken internally
at Apple is to make sure that we
reduce the total number of IOs.
Every single IO eliminated is
that much more time that you
can devote to other things.
And on a network, every single IO,
particularly on a flaky network,
is a potential stall for your app.
So consider that.
[Transcript missing]
And then in terms of how
to best use the APIs,
make sure you use large
page line buffers.
That's still a very good thing to do.
And when you know you
don't want the data,
you're just trying to write
something out to disk,
you already have something in memory,
you're not going to go back
and reread it from disk,
use that no cache bit.
That'll stop us from
buffering it for you.
Okay, in the area of networking,
CF Network, which has a pretty
in-depth talk Friday at 5,
is our first answer for you for
most of your networking needs.
CF Networking is designed
to be very high performing.
It's designed to work very well as an
asynchronous API with the run loop,
the CF run loop or the Carbon event loop.
There, again,
the guidelines are to use large
buffers so that you avoid going in
and out of the kernel on your IOs.
And if you really, really care about
optimizing your performance,
particularly over varying
different link speeds,
you probably want to look
at using adaptive solutions.
So look at the size of your buffer,
see how much you read and write,
maybe start with something conservative,
double it up until you get to
a point where you think you're
getting a maximum throughput.
This is particularly
important over slower speeds,
slower speed links like modems.
And then on the don't use
category of networking APIs,
OpenTransport is another one of those
APIs which we brought to OS X to
help you bring your apps over.
It is not optimal.
OpenTransport by itself has several
threads in its implementation
and it's there for compatibility.
We're not extending it.
So the two really replacements is
either sockets if you really need that
level of functionality or CF network.
And then if you're at a higher
level and using URL access,
there's two solutions there too.
CF network if you really care
about some of the details of the
protocol that you're dealing with,
so HTTP or FTP,
or the new APIs in Web Foundation,
NSURL request and NSURL response.
response.
And then again, you can use FS Usage
for measuring network.
And you'd be surprised,
just leaving FS Usage running on a
terminal and just using your app lets
you see how you're using the network.
And then the best tool,
particularly if you're interested in
what's happening at the protocol level,
is TCP Dump.
That's the best tool that
we offer to let you actually
examine the packets in detail.
Okay, and now I'm going to turn that
back over to Curt to talk to
you about drawing performance.
Thanks John.
So next, we'll talk about drawing.
Now like I mentioned,
this is a huge issue.
If you're not drawing
as quickly as possible,
and this is in terms of the
amount of your drawing or the
efficiency of your drawing,
the user is definitely going to
feel a sense of sluggishness.
So there's three problems that
I'm going to talk about in
terms of drawing performance,
and that's too much drawing,
inefficient drawing,
and then there's the text
performance aspect of drawing.
So let's talk about too much drawing.
That can be broken down into
problems of scope and frequency.
And that means that in terms of scope,
let's say that you need
to update one control,
and rather than updating that
one control's visual state,
you're updating the user
pane that contains it,
or maybe the entire contents of a window.
And then in terms of frequency,
maybe that you're drawing periodically,
you're drawing too much based on a timer,
or maybe you have a real
time-based system that's pulling
in some information for display,
but the user's disabled that,
so there's no sense in updating that.
And that consumes resources from other
apps and utilities running on your system
and generally slows down performance.
So how do you identify whether
you're drawing too much?
Well, an excellent utility
is to use Quartz Debug.
Now this is in developer applications,
and this will allow you to
identify problems both in
terms of scope and frequency,
and it works with all Carbon drawing,
whether you're drawing
with Quick Draw or Quartz.
And to find problems in terms of scope,
you would check the checkbox for
flash screen updates in yellow.
And what this does is every
time something is drawn
or flushed to the screen,
it'll show you the con-- or
it'll flash in yellow that area
that's being drawn to the screen.
So you can visually identify what
areas are being drawn too much.
If you just need to be drawing
one control and you're drawing
the whole contents of the window,
you'll be able to identify that visually.
Now, in terms of frequency,
you can check the checkbox for
flashing identical updates in red.
And this will flash parts of your UI with
red every time the bits aren't changing
but you're flushing the contents.
So it'll help you identify where
you're drawing too much and these
areas don't need to be flushed.
So once you've identified
where you're drawing,
how do you resolve this?
Well, this is really up to you.
You need to identify what it
is you need to be drawing,
when you need to do it,
and you need to go through
your own code and figure out
these areas for optimization.
Now, of course,
we have technologies that we'd
like you to take advantage of,
which will help in that,
and I totally recommend adopting HIVU.
And the reason for this,
and this is for your custom content,
and this is also known
as compositing mode.
And the reason I encourage you to adopt
it is because it is designed specifically
to draw as little as possible.
It's based, it's architected around
an invalidation model,
which is superior to a drawing model,
because when multiple areas
of your view need to change,
you invalidate those areas,
and then the view system will come down
and call your main draw bottleneck,
so you'd only be drawing when
the system is telling you to.
So this encourages the use of,
if you need to update multiple
parts or many parts of your
app or your view all at once,
there will only be one
net draw operation.
It also allows you to specify opacity.
And this is important because
any view system is a hierarchy.
And that your view may need to be
drawn after the views behind it.
Like if it's embedded in a user pane,
which is also embedded in a window.
If there's any type of
transparency with your view,
all of these views behind
need to be drawn first.
Well, HIV can optimize this if you
indicate to it that you are opaque.
Your view is opaque or maybe
part of your view is opaque.
And the view system can optimize by not
drawing the contents behind your view.
I encourage you to go see session 425,
"HIV in Depth." This will give
you more information about HIV.
Okay, well, my content's not in HIView.
It's not drawing in a composite window.
What can I do then?
Well, keep in mind that every time you
change the state of your controls
or a value of your control,
that control's going to need to
redraw in a non-composite window.
For example, a scroll bar.
When you set the minimum, the maximum,
and the value of that scroll bar,
it's going to be drawing three times.
Another good example is
the pop-up button control.
When you add items to that control,
each time you do that,
it's going to redraw.
So if you need to do any
type of bulk value operations
in a non-composite window,
hide that control.
Do these bulk operations
and then show that control.
So rather than having a draw
count of n for that many of
operations you're going to do,
you'll have a net draw count of one.
Also,
you can mimic HIView-like behavior by
paying attention to update regions.
So don't draw things
that are already valid.
So you can pay attention to
update regions if you're paying
attention to update events.
Or you can mimic behavior by
using the window the valid window
rect or valid window region APIs.
So next area of drawing problems,
performance problems,
is inefficient drawing.
Now this may be because you're
doing too much work to get the
bits you need onto the screen.
And that could be because
you're using the wrong APIs or
using APIs inefficiently,
or maybe there's some better alternatives
on Panther to do your drawing.
So again, how do you identify that
you're drawing inefficiently?
Well, the best technique is to
sample your drawing code.
And like I mentioned before,
it's going to take periodic snapshots
of your app so you can identify where
most of your time is being spent
and where you can optimize that.
Also, visually go through your code,
inspect what's going on
within your draw path,
see where you can optimize areas out,
and here's some stuff you can look for.
Triple buffering or multiple buffering.
Now again, on classic Mac OS,
Mac OS 9 and earlier,
you're dealing with constrained,
really tight memory and it was
generally easier or more efficient
to redraw the contents of the window
than it was to keep those bits around.
Well, Mac OS X obviously has a double
buffering system so that it takes
care of tearing and flicker for you.
So again, like on a classic system,
if you wanted to avoid this
type of tearing or flicker,
you would instead employ double
buffering techniques which is to draw
into an off screen and then copy the
contents of that off screen all at once.
So if you're maintaining code that
was originally written for Mac OS 9 or
earlier or targeted for those platforms,
keep this in mind that if you have
application level double buffering,
this is completely unnecessary
on Mac OS X in a sense to
avoid flicker and tearing.
Also inspect your drawing code
and see if region processing
is showing up in your samples.
If you have complex regions,
this can be kind of expensive.
Now, I should point out that on Panther,
that the internal implementation
of regions has changed.
So it has better performance and
there's no 64K limit anymore.
But if these are showing
up in your samples,
it might be a good idea,
or is actually a good idea
to use simpler regions,
like rectangular regions
is a good example.
And if dirty region maintenance
shows up in your samples,
and this is because,
let me just identify why that is,
is that Quick Draw,
each time you do a draw operation,
it needs to maintain this
dirty region that is going
to flush to the screen later.
So if you're doing a lot
of Quick Draw operations,
maybe this dirty region
maintenance is going to show up.
So if you know ahead of time that
you're going to be doing a lot of
operations into a particular region,
you can tell Quick Draw ahead of time
using the API QD set dirty region.
Then perform all your drawing operations
and it completely removes the overhead.
of Quick Draw dealing with
that dirty region for you.
Now this is another important area.
Like I mentioned on classic Mac OS,
it's easier to regenerate information,
or it's more efficient to
regenerate information than it is
to keep this information around.
Well, redundant calculations may
show up in your drawing code.
And a good example of this is when
we were optimizing the tabs control,
we were looking through that.
And if you think of the tab,
the tabs control, it's a user pane,
it's got the tab items with
it with text drawing in there.
And each time we would go draw,
we were getting the text
dimensions for each of those items,
figuring out the metrics of each item,
and then going through
with the draw operation.
Well,
the metrics of the text and the labels,
they're not going to
be changing that often,
so it doesn't make sense to
recalculate that each time.
It's a better idea to
cache that information.
So go ahead and cache
to avoid this problem.
You may be mixing
Quick Draw and Quartz drawing.
Now, this can be inefficient because
the Quick Draw port is not
synchronized for you with the
Quartz context that backs that.
So avoid this type of drawing.
So, for example,
if you're going to be using Appearance
Manager APIs for your drawing,
which you should avoid,
and I'll mention that in a moment.
There needs to be some synchronization
that's behind your back to keep that
QuickDraw port in the CG context in sync.
If you must mix this type of drawing,
quick drawing, quartz drawing,
do it in blocks for each
framework to avoid extra overhead.
So draw with all of your
quick draw APIs first,
followed by all your quartz drawing,
or vice versa.
So on the front of using new APIs,
using more modern APIs,
we recommend using Quartz.
I mean,
for all of your primitive drawing,
you should be using Quartz.
So this requires you to generate your
information in Quartz native formats,
and you can do this at build time.
So if you can convert all of
your information to Quartz native
formats like PDF at build time,
that's good.
And you can also do this at run time.
For example,
there's the Quick Draw API to convert
or to draw a PICT into a context.
So at runtime, you can take a PICT,
you can draw that into a
context associated with the
PDF context and use that,
cache that information,
and then use that image
for subsequent drawing.
So, you're probably thinking, "Well,
Curt,
you're telling me to draw with Quartz,
but all my drawing code
is based on Quick Draw.
How do I do this?" Well,
to get a CG context from
this Quick Draw port,
you'd use these APIs: Qt Begin CG Context
and Qt End CG Context.
And now what this does is it
will cache that context for you,
so you don't have to.
So this allows you to
print with both CG and
Quick Draw drawing on the same page.
But you should keep in mind
that in between these APIs,
Quick Draw drawing is
going to be disabled.
Now also, you shouldn't use the
API QD begin CG context,
draw using some courts,
and then end that context,
and then repeat that over and over.
You should consolidate all of your
course drawing between these APIs.
Also keep in mind that the CG context
and the graph port aren't synchronized,
so if you need to synchronize the
origin or the clipping region,
you'll have to do that on your own.
So what's the difference between
a flush and a synchronize?
Quite simply, if you do CG context flush,
it tells the draw system that that
context is going to be flushed at
the next opportunity it can be.
So it's generally an immediate response.
and CG Context Synchronize
is for a delayed flush.
So this is more like queuing up
different contexts to be flushed.
Contexts, contuses?
So what you would generally be doing
is doing all of your drawing and then
call the API CG Context Synchronize
to let the draw system know that
that's going to need to be flushed.
And then the HI Toolbox during its draw
loop will flush the context for you.
Other APIs you should be using
are the new HITHeme APIs.
Now, these are new in Panther,
and it's a simple mapping
between the old Appearance
Manager APIs and these new APIs.
So, for example,
if you're drawing some theme primitives,
like using the API Draw Theme Button,
there's an equivalent
API called HITHeme Draw Button.
So I encourage you to
check out hitheme.h.
And the reason these APIs are
now available is because when
you're using--because we're
doing all of our drawing,
the toolbox is doing all of its
drawing with courts natively.
So if you're drawing
with the Quick Draw APIs,
the toolbox needs to either create a
context for your port or use a cache port
and deal with the maintenance of that.
So by exposing these APIs,
you're in charge of the context.
It requires you to create a context and
maintain that context for your drawing.
And all of these
APIs require an orientation.
This is because the high-level toolbox
in Quick Draw deal with a top left
origin-based view system and courts due
to its PDF background deals with the
bottom left origin with an orientation.
So you can use these APIs for
doing either types of drawing.
And generally you would do this
because if you create a context,
it's going to be bottom
left origin based.
But if a context is given
to you by the toolbox,
so for example if you have a custom view,
and during this draw Carbon event,
it will hand you a CG context,
and that will already be transformed
to be top left origin based.
So that would be normal orientation.
So also check out session 409,
Carbon AHL Toolbox for
information about this.
So why would you want to do this?
Well, number one reason is performance.
I went through personally
through many of the controls,
the standard controls in the system,
and converted them from using
the Appearance Manager APIs over
to the new H.I.Thema APIs.
In some cases,
we were seeing the controls drawing
twice as fast with respect to on Jaguar.
Most of the common controls
will draw 25% faster.
So this is solely for performance
and you should definitely be
using these APIs rather than
old Appearance Manager APIs if
you have that in your code.
Text drawing.
We got a lot of feedback about the
text drawing performance on Mac OS X.
We want it fast, and we've done a lot of
work to improve that.
So if you're going to be
drawing user interface text,
rather than using the old Appearance
Manager APIs for getting the
text dimensions and drawing,
which were Get Theme Text Dimensions
and Draw Theme Text Box,
you should instead use
the new HITHeme APIs,
HITHeme Get Text Dimensions,
HITHeme Draw Text Box.
Now, this is over twice as fast
on Panther than on Jaguar.
And you can also see that the raw
performance of Draw Theme Text Box has
definitely improved.
You should definitely be using HITheme
DrawText for your user interface drawing.
Not only does it give
you better performance,
but it gives you better control over how
you're going to be laying out the text
and drawing that in terms of flushness,
truncation,
and how many lines are going to be drawn.
Now let's say that you're
handling text drawing on your own.
You're using Atsui for your drawing.
So some tips for using Atsui.
Well, keep in mind that that
API is a paragraph-based API.
So you should be creating a
text layout per paragraph.
Also, reuse the layout and the style
objects where appropriate.
Rather than destroying a text
layout when you're done with it and
then recreating another one to set
it to look at a new text buffer,
keep that layout around and then set
it to look at a new run of text using
the API atsu_layout_set_text_pointer.
So reuse these objects.
It eliminates the overhead for a lot
of redundant destruction and then
reconstruction of those data structures.
Also, if you need to lay out a
paragraph at a fixed width,
use the batch API for breaking a line,
which is @sue-batch-breakline.
Now, of course,
this is rather than manually
going through a break loop and
using the @sue-breakline API.
This will be much faster for doing that.
Also, when you're drawing text,
if you need to get the
dimensions of that text,
use ATSU Get Glyph Bounds.
Now, this is a good technique also
because under the covers,
it's going to cache the layout for you.
So a subsequent draw using
ATSU Draw Text is going to be very fast.
Also,
you should be creating and associating
some font fallbacks with that
layout if performance is a concern.
If you don't specify a
font fallback's object,
it's going to rely on
the system fallbacks,
which may be expensive to generate.
And again,
keep in mind that the ATSU styles,
it's not one-to-one in
terms of ATSU layouts.
You don't have to have one per layout.
So what you'll generally be wanting to
do is creating a style and associate
that with a number of different layouts.
Finally,
I'd like to talk about just general
responsiveness issues on Mac OS X.
Spinning Cursor.
Most people are very familiar
with this spinning rainbow cursor.
That's definitely a problem
that we want to avoid.
Other parts of your UI may
become non-responsive while
you're tracking the mouse.
The user's tracking a custom control,
for example,
and the app becomes non-responsive.
Parts of your screen aren't updating.
Maybe the CPU is pegged
while you're tracking this.
This is a starvation of resources
from other utilities that
are running on your system.
Or maybe the app is just slow to respond,
it just feels sluggish.
Now, you can find some of these
problems using Activity
Monitor in Applications Utilities,
and this will allow you to
identify the CPU utilization.
You can see when the processor is pegged.
and many others.
And you can also identify problems using
developer applications spin control.
Actually, that's singular.
And this utility,
what it will do is when it's launched,
whenever the system
spinning cursor comes up,
it'll start sampling your app
or it'll start sampling that app
that has caused that to spin.
So you can see where the time is being
spent and why did it stop responding.
Also from the command line,
you can use top.
So do I identify how to resolve
this problem of the spinning cursor,
which seems to be an issue?
Let's understand why this is happening.
Well,
In general, what it is,
it's being caused because your app
is no longer responding to events.
So the user has input
some keys in the keyboard.
And in a perfect world,
all of those events get picked up by
your app and processed immediately.
But sometimes your app is busy.
You're processing loads of information.
You're looking for intelligent life.
And so events that are coming
in the system are not being
picked up by your application.
So what the system does is it
puts up this spinning cursor.
And that really is correct behavior.
What it's doing is it's telling the user
that your app is not responding anymore.
If you're an event-driven application
and you are no longer picking up events,
you are not responding.
And that's correct behavior.
So what are some solutions for this?
Well, the best solution is to call into
the Event loop and start processing
those events and that means that if
you're completely Carbon event based
and using run application Event loop,
get into that API, start allowing events
to come into the app.
So that means to adopt Carbon events
or--because by adopting Carbon events,
the system takes care,
the toolbox has its standard
event handlers and they'll
take care of tracking for you.
And if there's
improvements in the system,
we can give those
improvements to you for free.
And thread your app.
If you do need to do
heavy duty processing,
you need to do--look for
intelligent alien life,
consider putting that on a worker
thread and then continue processing
the user events on your main thread.
And also look for polling.
Of course, like, am I polling?
Again, you would use the same utilities
as I mentioned earlier.
You'd be using activity monitors
to see when the CPU utilization
is at or near 100 percent,
or you'd be using top to
find out the CPU usage.
Now, if the user clicks the mouse and
the CPU goes up to being pegged,
you've got a problem and you need
to figure out what to do about that.
So, there's four main reasons
you'd probably be polling.
And there's four
alternatives for doing this.
Now, if you need to track the cursor,
for example,
that the user's clicked in an area
of your view or your custom control,
and you need to track where
the position of the cursor is,
rather than using the very
familiar while mouse down,
get the location of the mouse,
you would instead use the
API track mouse location.
And when you call this API,
the system blocks.
So rather than pegging the CPU,
you're being extremely quiet.
Nothing is happening in your app
until some user interaction happens.
When the user moves the mouse,
this will return and give you
an indicator of where the mouse
location is and what happened.
Why did it return?
Did the mouse move or did
the mouse button come up?
Now,
if you need to determine where the cursor
is on your screen because you want to
provide some type of rollover behavior,
maybe you'd be pulling the
cursor location periodically.
Well, instead of doing that,
you would want to use the
APIs for tracking regions.
Those are the mouse tracking region APIs.
And these APIs are incredibly
cool because they will allow
you to specify a region of your
window that you're interested in,
and then you will get notifications
via Carbon events when the mouse
has entered and exited that region.
Another reason you may be pulling
is because you want to find out
when a condition has changed.
I want to see when preferences have
changed or a seed value has changed so
I know to reload those preferences in.
So, rather than doing that,
you want to watch for notifications.
Now, this is as simple as
installing a callback,
which is essentially what a
Carbon event notification is.
You're installing a callback,
registering for certain
notifications to come in,
and that callback will get
called when that has happened.
So you can watch for notifications, like,
let the system tell you when
conditions have changed rather
than asking the system continually.
And finally, you may be idling by
pulling the system clock.
And what that means is you want
to wait for a specified time to
elapse before continuing execution.
Well, rather than pulling the
system clock and spinning,
you would want to use timers,
Carbon event timers,
which you would install and have some
code execute after this time has elapsed.
Or just jump right into the event loop.
There's an API called
Run Current Event Loop,
and it allows you to
specify a timeout time.
So you'd call that API and your timers
will continue to fire at that point,
and then the execution will
proceed when that function returns.
Finally, I'd like to mention
asynchronous window dragging.
This is definitely in the
realm of perceived performance.
This is a new facility
for Carbon application,
and it allows the Windows Server to
deal with the dragging of the window.
Now,
this frees up the app from doing this.
So, if you are very busy and your
application has become unresponsive,
the Windows Server will take care
of dragging the window for you.
So, this will contribute to the
feeling that the user is still
in control of the system,
and there are still things that they
can do even when your app is hung.
So you're probably tired
of listening to me talk,
and so I'd like to bring up the
high-level toolbox demo boy,
Guy Fullerton!
Okay,
so I want to give you a brief example of
how you might be able to track down some
performance problems in your application.
And to do that,
I'm going to use an application
we've been working on,
which is a game.
Now, we've been working on this
game for a little bit,
and our beta testers,
we have this extensive
set of beta testers,
and they've all been
complaining about two things.
One, the app launches slowly.
And two, after you play the game,
actually there's three things.
Two, after you play the game,
the system kind of slows down.
It gets sluggish.
It's like our app is stealing
cycles from somewhere.
And the third problem is
that on slower machines,
the game doesn't deliver
a very good experience.
The interface gets choppy.
But to understand this,
let me go ahead and
launch the application.
I'm going to do it via the command line,
just because that's going to
allow me to more easily do
some other tests in a second.
So if you watch down on the dock,
this is the application.
Watch it bounce, and it's going to take a
little while to load up.
Yeah, four or five, yeah.
So it took a couple of bounces.
So here's the game.
It's a pin the tail on the donkey game.
And, you know, pin the tail on the
donkey is pretty easy.
You just have to drag the
tail over to the donkey.
Oh, I better start a new game first.
So I start the game and the countdown,
count up, actually starts.
And then I start staring at you.
And that's actually the
challenge of the game.
Can you possibly get the tail on
the donkey while I'm staring at you?
Well, I did and I got a high score.
I'm pretty good at it.
But, you know, I've been riding it.
I've got to be pretty good at it.
So that's the game.
But the main complaint that
users have been saying is that
it takes a while to launch.
So let's go take a look at that.
And there's two ways
I want to look at this.
The first way is through
the use of SpinControl.
Now, SpinControl is one of our
performance test tools.
It will detect when an
application is unresponsive,
and it will automatically
sample that application.
Now, I know my app is
unresponsive during launch,
so SpinControl is going to automatically
detect that and do a sample.
But I wouldn't necessarily have
to use SpinControl to generate the
information I'm going to generate.
I could use Sampler to
generate the same information.
It just so happens that this is a little
bit more convenient for my situation.
So we'll launch it again.
And as it's launching,
you'll see SpinControl
updated its interface,
saying, hey, it was unresponsive
and it sampled the app.
And then I get the results.
If I double click on that and open it up,
I can see the backtrace for
the time various operations
took during App Bring Up.
So of course I was in Maine for a
couple seconds and I was setting
up my game window and setting
up my high scores dialogue.
Oh, and then I started doing
some preferences operations.
Well, you know, it occurs to me that
I load my preferences,
my application preferences
at Bring Up time,
but most of my preferences
is just a high score list.
I store a really big list of all the
scores that have happened on the game.
And, you know,
the high score list really doesn't
matter at App Bring Up time.
The only time I consult it is after
the user has played a game and
I need to compare and see if it
deserves to be on the high scores,
or if the user displays
the high scores window.
So this real quickly,
by rethinking the way
I initialize my preferences,
would allow me to cut about a second and
a half off of my application launch time.
So the next thing I want to look at with
respect to app launch time is FS usage.
John talked about FS usage.
There's a bunch of different options
you can pass to it to generate
different amounts of information.
And I'm going to pass the -w option,
which generates some extra
info about errors and file
sizes and things like that.
And I'm going to pipe that through
to grep just so I see the file
system operations that happen
with respect to my application.
So if I turn that on and
relaunch my application.
it's going to generate
a bunch of information.
Now, most of the work that is in this
log is stuff happening on my
behalf because of the system.
You know, my application executable
is being loaded,
things like that.
And that's all fine.
I've already gone through this and
looked at one interesting thing.
Now, I load some images in my application
in the form of PNG files.
And the first one that gets loaded--
I don't know if you can read that
up there-- but the first one that
gets loaded is called ddonkey.png.
That's the big donkey
image in the window.
I need that at app bring up because
that's part of my interface.
And that's fine.
And then I load the donkey tail,
and that's cool.
But I find another load here,
and it's a title PNG.
Well, I don't actually use that title
anywhere in my main window.
I only use it in my rules dialog.
So that's another way
I could actually speed up my
application launch performance,
is just load that PNG file only when
the user brings up the rules dialog.
Now,
some of the extra information that the
-w option passes back is the amount
of time this particular load took.
And you can see that it's just
a fraction of a second that
it took to open that file.
And there is--
Yeah, if I look at the file identifiers,
yeah, it's not a whole lot of time spent
actually manipulating that file,
but every little bit counts.
And if you look for things like this,
you might actually find that the
loading of files at app bring up time
is just a symptom of a larger problem.
So you should go through FSUs,
find out what sorts of things
your application is doing,
and see if they really need
to be done at app launch time.
So once the application is
running and I play a game,
I finish a game, the users say, "Hey,
you know what?
Subsequent games are either sluggish or
my system just completely bogs down and
let's go ahead and launch Quartz Debug
here because it's got a little CPU gauge,
frame meter, and oh wow, sure enough,
it looks like my interface isn't
doing much but I'm eating up
some CPU speed and I'm trying to
render over 90 frames per second.
So something's going wrong here.
There's a couple different ways
we can look at my interface and
figure out what's going wrong.
The first way I want to look
at is flash identical updates.
So let's get this out of the way.
[Transcript missing]
"My time display,
even though the game's not running,
which is a first problem.
But another thing I notice is
that even though the time display,
if I get rid of it,
even though my text is
only about 24 pixels tall,
I'm repainting this entire area
every time I repaint the text.
Well, so this is something I could
go in and fix in my nib.
What I should really do is I should
shrink up that field that I'm
using to display the time with.
And that would save me
some processing cycles.
The OS would not need
to render quite as much.
Another thing I can look at here with
Quartz Debug is to flash screen updates.
So again, we're going to see this
time rendering constantly,
which is unfortunate because
I'm not playing the game.
But I would expect that to flash
yellow if I actually start a game.
So let's start a game
and see what happens.
Okay, so far so good.
Nothing entirely unexpected.
But as I actually start
to drag the tail around,
wow,
I'm seeing a lot of drawing happen here.
And you know what?
I didn't really intend to do this.
Every time I move the mouse,
it's repainting the
entire donkey picture.
What a much better scenario for this
game would have been to only repaint
the place where the tail was and
the place where the tail is now.
And that's going to save
me a lot of time because,
you know what,
just the delta between a tail
move and its old position and
its new position is pretty small.
I'd probably say easily a 40th
of that entire image size.
So that's going to cut down my
draw time there by about a 40th.
And that will make my users much,
much happier.
And then I can spend my time working
on better things like good gameplay.
So anyway, hopefully now you see a couple
ways that you can use our tools to
identify and track down some of the
typical problems in your applications.
Curt?
Thank you Guy.
That was such a great demo.
He's like an excellent programmer
on the Toolbox team because of that.
So, finally, I'd like to just kind of
end up on some general tips.
Now,
I mentioned earlier that you should cache
frequently used information or frequently
calculate information with your views.
Well, this is really important to do
for frequently used information
or information or data that's
very expensive to calculate.
Keep in mind that there is
a time and space tradeoff.
And what I mean by that is,
if you end up caching 50
megabytes of information,
and then the user clicks
in another application,
and then the system all of a
sudden needs that 50 megabytes,
it's going to start
paging it out to disk.
And then when the user
clicks back into your app,
it's going to page all
that information back in.
And it may have been--just
been more efficient to just
regenerate that information.
So just be aware of that.
The key here is frequently
used information or very
expensive data to create.
Again, always provide feedback.
Now, if you're just going to be
doing a simple operation,
put up some chasing arrows.
For some time-consuming process,
put up a progress bar.
I mean,
if the user thinks that something's
going to take 10 seconds and it's
going to take them four hours,
that's something that
they should probably know.
And always allow them to cancel.
This is really important to let the user
be in control of your application rather
than your app being in control of them.
So finally,
I'd just like to point out that
you should get familiar with the
performance tools we have on the system.
There's a lot of utilities on the system,
many of which we haven't
talked about at all.
But get familiar with Quartz Debug,
Sampler, Spin Control, Mallet Debug,
Shark.
Go check out this session
on Carbon Performance Tools.
Also,
become familiar with the new modern APIs.
Quartz,
which you should definitely be using.
H.I.
Theme, use that on Panther.
Take advantage of Carbon events.
This is going to give you more
control over your application,
better performance.
Take advantage of HIView for
all of your custom drawing.
And keep in mind that we've spent
a lot of time optimizing the
toolbox and other parts of Carbon,
and it's really everybody's
responsibility to keep performance going.
So finally, to go through the roadmap and
other reference information,
I'd like to bring back Xavier.
Right on time.
Excellent.
Thanks, Curt.
Okay,
I really hope that you guys got the meat
of what we're trying to achieve here,
and it gave you a couple of good
ideas to go back to your offices.
And I would really,
really appreciate if you could
spend some time finding out what's
going on in your application.
Once again, lunchtime,
try to find out about the drawing.
We have great tools.
I don't know if we mentioned,
but we have Shark as well,
which is a very, very cool application.
A little bit like Sampler,
but it's going to give you
ideas as well on how you can
optimize specifically for the G5.
You know,
saying maybe you should run some loops,
maybe you should actually
use Altevec in that part.
So remember,
we have a brand new set of tools
that can help you identify the
hotspots in your application.
So make good use of it.
All right, just after this session,
we have a feedback forum for the toolbox.
I'd encourage you to assist
if you had any questions,
if you want to give us your feedback,
things that you like,
or things that you really like,
or things that you really, really like,
and things that you don't like, okay?
Maybe.
Session 305 on Tuning Software.
The first session of the talk with
Performance Tools was Wednesday for
those of us that can travel in time.
And tomorrow morning,
we're going to have a great session,
session 310,
on debugging and tuning common
applications with Apple's tools.
We'll be showing you a couple of
cool tricks with Xcode on how to
improve a debugging experience,
how to get the most of your time
while debugging common applications.
I encourage you to go there.
Oh, I'm forgetting the best, of course,
for the end.
Session 425, where Mr.
Ed will be talking about HIV in depth.
HIV was introduced last year,
actually not in this room, but at WWDC.
It's really the future of
drawing controls on Mac OS X.
And if you have any custom
controls in your application,
you really have to go there.
Should you have any questions,
you guys have been
changing the slides again.
Anyway, should you have any questions,
please don't hesitate to send me an email
at xavier@apple.com and I'll be more than
happy to find out how we can help you.
We have some documentation and
I encourage you to go on our
website on developer.apple.com.
We're revamping completely our
website to make it easier for you
guys to actually find information.
So check it out, see like, you know,
all the sections that we have on Carbon.
We've had it in the last month or so,
actually,
a brand new sample code as well for like,
HIView.
Look at it inside the Carbon sample
code and you're going to
see two different sections.
You're going to have HIToolbox
and HIToolbox for Mac OS X.
So just check out the
HIToolbox for Mac OS X section.
Great start there.
A couple of technical notes:
Mac OS X Quick Draw Performance to help
you find out what's going on with your
drawing in your app and what should
you be doing now on Mac OS X to get
the best of performance for drawing.
We have things on the file manager
and some QAs here available for
improving at Suite Text Drawing.